---
title: "How is Quiz Bowl Different from Knowledge Bowl?"
permalink: /info/knowledge-bowl-comparison/
---

## Questions

Knowledge Bowl features shorter questions, usually two or three sentences. In
quiz bowl, the questions are generally longer--around a paragraph---and the
clues are listed from **hardest to easiest** (more [here](/info/pyramidal)).
This means that if a player knows more about a given subject, they can buzz in
before a player with less knowledge. For example, a player who has studied
several of Tchaikovsky's works is more likely to get a question on him than
someone who has only heard of the 1812 Overture. With shorter questions, the
more knowledgeable player will frequently be beaten in a buzzer race.

Bonus questions are another defining feature of quiz bowl. When a team answers a
tossup, they are asked three short questions (all related to the same subject),
with 5 seconds to collaborate on each one. Bonuses generally consist of an easy
part, a medium part, and a hard part. This is designed to reward teams for the
depth of their knowledge.

## Match format

In Knowledge Bowl, three teams play each other at once. In quiz bowl, each match
is a face-off between two teams.

## Scoring

In Knowledge Bowl, everything is 1 point. If a question is answered correctly
after the first word, it's worth 1 point. If someone gets it right after all
other teams buzz and miss it, it's still 1 point. In quiz bowl, if a player
answers a toss-up before the power-mark (a pre-designated point in the
question), their team earns an 15 points instead of the usual 10. This mechanic
rewards players for their depth of knowledge.

Correctly answering a tossup earns a team a bonus---three questions worth 10
points each. This allows a team to earn up to 45 points in a single tossup-bonus
cycle.

## Levels of Play

While Knowledge Bowl ends after high school, quiz bowl is played by colleges and
universities across the US and Canada. Several Colorado schools, such as CU
Boulder and UCCS, have quiz bowl teams and regularly attend tournaments.

## Statistics

Far more statistics are recorded in quiz bowl than in Knowledge Bowl. Perhaps
more importantly, quiz bowl records *individual stats for every player*. When a
player attends a quiz bowl tournament, they can find out exactly how well they
did compared to every other player at the tournament. Teams (and individual
players) can see how they improve over time and identify what they need to work
on.

In addition, all results from quiz bowl tournaments are posted online (usually
on [the Quizbowl Resource Center](http://www.hsquizbowl.org/db/tournaments/) or
[NAQT's website](https://www.naqt.com/stats/results.jsp)).

{% comment %}
## Teamwork

Teamwork is different in QB. In Knowledge Bowl, speaking out loud to your
teammates is considered conferring at any point during the question. This means
that all communication must be non-verbal. In quiz bowl, tossups are for
individuals with no conferring, but bonuses which are earned by correctly
answering tossups are open for a team to discuss and communicate about. Usually
you will have 5 seconds after a part of a bonus to discuss and decide on an
answer. This increases team work and reasoning for the team and makes for more
right answers and less agony when someone who claims to know a question strikes
out when you easily could have answered it if you were able to discuss it.
{% endcomment %}
