---
title: "Rules and Gameplay"
permalink: /info/rules/
---

This page contains a brief summary of basic quiz bowl gameplay. However, many
variations on these rules exist, and you should make sure you know which one
a given tournament is using. Common rulesets include the [ACF](https://
acf-quizbowl.com/official-gameplay-rules/), [NAQT](https://www.naqt.com
/rules/), and [PACE](http://www.pace-nsc.org/official-pace-ruleset/) rules.

## Structure

A quiz bowl match is played between **two teams**, usually comprised of **four
players each** (shorthanded teams are generally allowed; see "Substitutions" for
more detail). Players are given lockout **buzzers**, which allow the moderator
to identify the first player to buzz.

There are two main types of questions: **tossups** and **bonuses**. Tossups are
read to both teams, and players answer by buzzing in. A bonus question consists
of three parts and is read to a team after one of their players successfully
answers a tossup.

Each game consists of **two halves**, which may be timed or untimed depending on
the tournament. In a timed game (most common with NAQT rules), each half is
usually 9 or 10 minutes long, depending on the tournament. Each half of an
untimed game consists of 10 tossups, as well as any bonuses read.

## Tossups

A tossup question consists of a series of individual clues, going from **hard to
easy**, all of which point to the same answer (see our article on [pyramidality
](/info/pyramidal) for more detail). This allows players who are more
knowledgeable about a subject to answer early.

Players answer by **buzzing in** (while the question is still being read).
During the reading of a tossup, players are **not allowed to communicate with
each other** verbally or via writing. However, players may raise their buzzers
or gesture (this is usually done when a player wishes to inform their teammates
that they have an idea, but aren't ready to buzz).

A player may buzz at any time during the reading of a tossup. After buzzing,
the player has **5 seconds** to answer (**2 seconds** on NAQT rules). Players
need not wait to be recognized before beginning their answer.

If the player is **correct**, they receive **10 points** and their team is given
a **bonus question**. At many tournaments, if a player buzzes before a marked
point in the question, they are awarded **15 points** (or possibly 20, depending
on the rules) instead of the usual 10. This is called a "power." Some packets,
such as those produced by ACF, do not have powers.

If the player is **incorrect** (or fails to give an answer in the allotted
time), their teammates **may not buzz** for the remainder of the question. In
addition, **5 points are deducted from their team's score**. This is known as a
"neg." However, this penalty does not apply if the moderator has finished
reading the question or if the other team has already buzzed. Some tournaments,
most notably the PACE NSC, have no negs.

In some cases, a player's answer is partially correct, but not specific enough
(for example, a player may answer "Roosevelt" without specifying Theodore or
Franklin). In this case, the moderator will **prompt** the player for more
information.

## Bonuses

A bonus questions is read to the team that correctly answers the preceding
tossup---the opposing team may not answer. Each bonus consist of **3 parts, worth
10 points each**. No penalties are given for incorrect answers. All parts of a
bonus are related to the same subject; this tests players on the depth of their
knowledge.

All parts of a bonus are read sequentially. Players may confer, but must answer
each part within **5 seconds** after the moderator finishes reading it. The
moderator will prompt the team for an answer after 4 seconds if none has been
given. Any player can answer; the moderator must take the first answer that is
clearly directed at them.

Some tournaments, most notably the NSC, have **"bounce-back" bonuses**. This
means that if one team gets a bonus part wrong, the other team is given an
opportunity to answer it.

Bonuses in a packet are usually read sequentially, and are not tied to specific
tossups. For example, if nobody correctly answers tossup 1, the team that gets
tossup 2 would still be read bonus 1.

## Tiebreakers

The method used to break a tie depends on the tournament. Many use
**"sudden-death" tiebreakers**, where tossups are read sequentially and the
first change in the score determines the winner. In tournaments played on NAQT
rules, **3 tossups** are read without bonuses. If a tie still remains, it is
broken by sudden-death tossups.

## Substitutions

Although a team may have more than four players on its roster, **no more than
four may play at the same time** (this applies to tournament play; it is
counterproductive to enforce this rule at practices).

Players can generally be substituted **between games, at halftime, and
before a tiebreaker**. At many tournaments, teams are allowed a single
**timeout** per game, during which substitutions can be made.
