---
title: "National Quiz Bowl Championships"
permalink: /tournaments/nationals/
---

## College

For various reasons (mostly historical), collegiate quiz bowl has multiple
national championships each year.

### ICT and CCCT

The [Intercollegiate Championship Tournament](https://www.naqt.com/ict/) (ICT)
is written and hosted by NAQT. Teams qualify based on their performance at one
of NAQT's Sectional Championship Tournaments (SCTs).

Community colleges can also qualify for NAQT's [Community College Championship
Tournament](https://www.naqt.com/ccct/) (CCCT).

### ACF Nationals

[ACF Nationals](https://acf-quizbowl.com/aboutus/) is hosted annually by ACF.
Unlike ICT, ACF Nationals is untimed, contains no pop culture or sports, and
requires teams to submit a packet. Teams qualify based on their performance at
the preceding ACF Regionals tournament.

### Chicago Open

Although it is not technically a "collegiate" tournament, this page would be
incomplete without a discussion of the Chicago Open. Held annually at the
University of Chicago, the tournament is open to all players---college students,
working adults, and even high schoolers (though the last case is rare). It is
generally considered the most difficult tournament in all of quiz bowl. Any
group of people may form a team, and packet submission is required.

## High School

Like college quiz bowl, high school quiz bowl has several national tournaments.

### HSNCT and SSNCT

The [High School National Championship Tournament](https://www.naqt.com/hsnct/)
(HSNCT) is hosted by NAQT. HSNCT is the largest tournament in quiz bowl, with a
field size of over 300 teams. The tournament uses timed rounds, and the
distribution is similar to that of NAQT's regular-season sets (though the
questions are harder). Teams can qualify by placing in the top 15% of any
tournament that uses NAQT questions.

In addition to HSNCT, schools that meet [NAQT's definition of a "small school"](
https://www.naqt.com/hs/small-school.html) can qualify for the [Small School
National Championship Tournament](https://www.naqt.com/ssnct/) (SSNCT). This can
be accomplished by finishing in the top 30% of teams from small schools in any
tournament using NAQT questions. Teams from small schools that qualify for HSNCT
will also qualify for SSNCT.

### NSC

The [National Scholastic Championship](http://www.pace-nsc.org/pace-nsc-2018-
june-2-3-washington-dc/) (NSC) is hosted by PACE. It is of comparable difficult
to HSNCT, but with several notable differences. NSC packets have slightly more
fine arts than HSNCT, and they contains no questions on pop culture or sports.
In addition, NSC features untimed rounds, no negs, 20-point powers, and
"bounceback" bonuses (where if a team gets a bounus part wrong, their opponent
has a chance to answer). Teams qualify for NSC by placing in the top 10-25% at
a PACE-certified tournament (the exact cutoff depends on the level of
certification).

### NASAT

The National All-Star Academic Tournament (NASAT) was originally created by
[HSAPQ](https://www.hsapq.com/), but is now independently organized. Unlike
HSNCT and NSC, teams are composed of the top 4 players from each state. It
features very difficult questions (comparable to college regionals) and is
considered the hardest tournament in high school quiz bowl. If you are
interested in playing for Colorado, contact us!

## Middle School

### MSNCT

NAQT hosts the [Middle School National Championship Tournament](https://
www.naqt.com/msnct/) (MSNCT), the middle school equivalent of HSNCT. Teams can
qualify by placing in the top 15% of any middle school tournament that uses NAQT
questions.
